
Are you an/a
Australian resident for tax purpose
OR
Foreign resident for tax purpose
OR
Temporary resident for tax purpose
?

The following is the information that will allow for an answer to be derived including tax reporting requirements based on the residency decided  - 

Australian Tax Law - Residency and tax (Individual Human Taxpayers) 

You could be an Australian resident for tax purposes even if you're not an Australian citizen or permanent resident.

You may have a visa to enter Australia, but are not an Australian resident for tax purposes.

There are four tests used to determine if you are an Australian resident for tax purposes.
You will be an Australian resident if you meet any one of these tests.


1- The resides test ->  you are a
resident of Australia if you
reside in Australia according
to the ordinary meaning of
‘reside’ – which means ‘to
dwell permanently, or for
considerable time, to have a
settled or usual abode, and to
live in a particular place’.

2 - The domicile test -> Under this test, you are a
resident of Australia if your
domicile is in Australia, unless
the Commissioner is satisfied
that your ‘permanent place of
abode’ is outside Australia.

3 - The 183 day test -> This test only applies to
individuals arriving in Australia.
You will be a resident under
this test if you spend over half
the year in Australia, unless
it is established that your
‘usual place of abode’ is
outside Australia and you
have no intention of taking
up residence here.

4 - The Commonwealth
superannuation
fund test -> This test only applies to
certain Australian Government
employees who are eligible
to contribute to the Public
Sector Superannuation Scheme
(PSS) or the Commonwealth
Superannuation Scheme (CSS).
If this is the case, you (and your
spouse and children under 16)
are considered to be a resident
of Australia regardless of any
other factors.

A legal decision (ZKBN and Commissioner of Taxation [2013] AATA 604 (27 August 2013) shows that a person who fails to cut their connection with Australia (close superannuation fund, dispose of or rent principal place of residence, change domicile)  will be treated as an Australian resident.

If you do not satisfy any of the residency
tests below, you are a foreign resident. 

You will be a ‘temporary resident’ if you
hold a temporary visa and neither you or
your spouse is an Australian resident within
the meaning of the Social Security Act
1991 (that is, not an Australian citizen or
permanent resident).


If you're an Australian resident for tax purposes, you are taxed on your worldwide income/taxed on your income regardless of source
foreign business income
foreign investment revenue income i.e dividend income, interest income, trust distribution income, partnership income
foreign capital gains income

Foreign income includes:

foreign pensions and annuities
foreign employment income
foreign investment income
foreign business income
capital gains on overseas assets.

foreign investment income includes: foreign dividend income, foreign interest income, foreign trust distribution income, foreign partnership income

As your foreign income may also be taxed in the source country, it is potentially subject to double taxation.

To overcome this, Australia has a system of credits and exemptions and has signed tax treaties with more than 40 countries, including all our major trade and investment partners.
Failure to disclose foreign income may result in  penalties and interest charges for the foreign income recipient


Foreign Resident

As a foreign resident, you have no tax-free
threshold and do not pay the Medicare levy.
You must still declare any income derived
in Australia, including any capital gains
on taxable Australian property in your
Australian tax return.

If you're not an Australian resident for tax purposes, you are only taxed on your Australian-sourced income, so you generally don't need to declare income you receive from outside Australia in your Australian tax return.

If you have a Higher Education Loan Program (HELP) or Trade Support Loan (TSL) debt and you're a non-resident for tax purposes – you'll need to declare your worldwide income or lodge a non-lodgment advice. You can do this using our online services via myGov, or through a registered Australian tax agent from 1 July 2017.

Temporary Resident

As a temporary resident, you only need
to declare income derived in Australia,
plus any income earned from employment
performed overseas for short periods while
you are a temporary resident.
Other foreign income and capital gains
do not have to be declared.

There are separate rules for working holiday maker and individuals who are tax residents of more than one country.

Under the Social Security Act 1991, an Australian resident is generally a person who resides in Australia and is either an Australian citizen or holds a permanent resident visa. ... For more information on residency for Social Security purposes, visit Department of Human Services .

Here are the Questions to resolve the answers to residency status.

Question Set 1
1.Do you live in Australia?
2. Do you maintain a permanent base in Australia?
3. Are you in Australia frequently?
4. Is your usual most common place of residence in Australia?
5. Do you reside in Australia more than you reside elsewhere?
Reside Test is Y if 3/5 is Y. Notice that the same question is simply recast

Question Set 2
1. Do you rent a house, room or apartment in Australia to dwell in?
2. a.Do you own a house in Australia? IF Y, b. is the house or any part of the house maintained for you to live in?
Domicile Test is Y if 1 or if 2 and Part A & B are Y.

Question Set 3
Did you recently arrive in Australia?
a. IF Y, then is Q2 also Y?
b. IF N, then Do you have any intention of taking up residence here?
IF Y, then did you spend 183 or more days in Australia?
183 Day Test is Y IF Y.

Question Set 4
Are you a Government employee?
IF Y, are you eligible to contribute to a Public Sector Superannuation Scheme?
The Commonwealth Superannuation Fund test is Y if Y. 

Do not ask more questions once the solution to Australian Residency is resolved.

If Y, then ANSWER, "You are an Australian Resident for Tax Purposes".

IF N, then ANSWER, "You are a Foreign Resident."

IF Foreign Resident, then 
Do you hold a temporary visa?
Is Domicile Test N?
IF N, then execute Domicile Test for Spouse i.e.
Does your spouse rent a house, room or apartment in Australia to dwell in?
Does your spouse own a house in Australia?

IF temporary visa is Y and N for Domicile Test for both partners, then Temporary Resident is Y.


